It was a bright, cold April day, and the clocks chimed at 1pm. Winston Smith, head tucked in his shoulders to shield him from the cutting wind, slipped through the glass door into the Victory Block, but not quickly enough to stop the cloud of granular dust from seeping in behind him.
The staircase smelled of boiled cabbage and old, rotting doormats. There was a colorful poster at one end, too large to be displayed in a cramped interior. It only showed a huge face, over a meter wide; the handsome ruddy face of a man of about forty-five with a thick black mustache. Winston headed for the stairs. It made no sense to check that the elevator was working. Even at the best of times, it was rarely active, and now, as a cost-saving measure for preparations for Hate Week, the electricity was not turned on before dark. Winston lived on the seventh floor, and since he was thirty-nine and had varicose ulcers above his ankle on his right leg, he climbed slowly, resting several times along the way. On each floor, in front of the elevator door, a poster with a huge face peered down from the wall. It was painted so that the man's eyes seemed to follow every movement of the passing person. BIG BROTHER LOOKS, it said at the bottom of the poster.
In the apartment an excited voice read the columns of figures about pig iron smelting. It emerged from an elongated metal plate like a frosted mirror set into the wall on the right. Winston turned the knob and the voice faded a little, but still every word came clearly. The device (called a telescope) could be muted but not turned off. Winston walked over to the window: a small, haggard figure whose thinness was emphasized even more by the navy blue jumpsuit, the party member's clothing. The man had very fair hair, a naturally ruddy complexion, and his skin was rough with coarse soap, dull razor blades and the recent frosts.
The world outside, even when viewed through the closed window, was cool. Down in the street, gusts of wind were blowing dust and scraps of paper into a whirlwind, and though the sun was shining, the sky was the color of steel; everything seemed to be devoid of color - except for the posters stuck up all over the place. The mustache face watched from every more exposed surface. One poster hung on the facade of the house directly opposite. BIG BROTHER IS LOOKING, it said, dark eyes drilling into Winston's. Down at street level, another poster with a torn corner flapped disorderly in the wind, revealing and obscuring the single word ANGSOC. In the distance, the helicopter descended between the rooftops, hovered for a moment like a meat fly, then took off and took off in an arc. It was a police patrol, spying on residents through windows. But ordinary police are a breeze. The Thought Police was a real terror.
Behind Winston, the voice from the telescreen was still chattering about pig iron smelting and surpassing the Ninth Three-Year Plan. The telescope served as both a receiver and transmitter, sensitive enough to pick up any sound louder than a low whisper, and moreover, as long as Winston remained within range of the metal plate, he was not only audible but also visible. Of course, no one knew if he was being watched at any given moment. There was only guesswork about how often and according to what rules the Thought Police conducts surveillance. It was also possible that he supervised everyone at all times. Either way, she could tune in to any channel she wanted. It remained, therefore, to live with the assumption - and one lived from a habit turned into reflex - that every word was eavesdropped on and every movement was closely followed, unless the room was just dark.
Winston's back was to the telescope. It was safer this way, although - as he knew - you could also read a lot from your back. A kilometer away, the mighty white edifice of the Ministry of Truth, his workplace, towered above the bleak landscape. And this is London, he thought with vague disgust, the main city of Runway One, the third most populous province in Oceania. He tried to recall some childhood memories to see if London had always looked the same. Did you always see here only rows of sleeping nineteenth-century tenements with walls supported by stamps, windows clogged with pieces of plywood, roofs patched with corrugated sheet and rickety, collapsing walls between the gardens? And the rubble of bombed houses covered with willowwood, over which clouds of white dust are rising, or areas completely destroyed by bombs, where colonies of poor wooden huts, real henhouses have grown up? But Winston's efforts were in vain, he couldn't remember anything; from his childhood, only a series of luminous images, devoid of background and meaning, remained in his memory.